[rocprofiler-sdk] Updating documentation for --selected-regions (#3327)
ROCm/rocm-systems: projects/rocprofiler-sdk/source/docs/how-to/using-rocprofiler-sdk-roctx.rst

Markers are used to insert a marker in the code with a message. Creating markers helps you see when a line of code is executed.

> When using ROCTx markers with profiling tools that support Perfetto trace visualization (such as ``rocprofv3`` with ``--output-format pftrace``), markers created with ``roctxMark()`` appear as arrows in the Perfetto UI timeline. For example, markers like ``roctxMark("pre-launch")`` and ``roctxMark("post-kernel-launch")`` will be displayed as visual markers that point to the exact timestamp when that line of code was executed.

Reviewer: Replace:
(such as `rocprofv3` with `--output-format pftrace`)
with:
such as `rocprofv3` or `rocprof-sys`

Author: Done

> When using ROCTx markers with profiling tools that support Perfetto trace visualization (such as ``rocprofv3`` with ``--output-format pftrace``), markers created with ``roctxMark()`` appear as arrows in the Perfetto UI timeline. For example, markers like ``roctxMark("pre-launch")`` and ``roctxMark("post-kernel-launch")`` will be displayed as visual markers that point to the exact timestamp when that line of code was executed.

Reviewer: The annotations in the figure are too bold and hide the markers in the trace. I would recommend using the attached snapshot instead with the following accompanying explanation (replacing the current explanation text):

```
To illustrate this, a call to roctxMark() was added after the kernel launch in the timing loop of the [daxpy training example code](https://github.com/amd/HPCTrainingExamples/blob/main/HIP-Optimizations/daxpy/daxpy_5.hip). In the Perfetto trace generated by running `rocprofv3 --runtime-trace` and `rocpd2pftrace`, we see visual markers at the end of each kernel launch in the timing loop ROCTx region.
```

<img width="1327" height="199" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/7b2a120d-09b0-4276-9263-08df740de02e" />

Author: Done

Markers are used to insert a marker in the code with a message. Creating markers helps you see when a line of code is executed.

When using ROCTx markers with profiling tools that support Perfetto trace visualization (such as ``rocprofv3`` or ``rocprof-sys``), markers created with ``roctxMark()`` appear as arrows in the Perfetto UI timeline. For example, markers like ``roctxMark("pre-launch")`` and ``roctxMark("post-kernel-launch")`` will be displayed as visual markers that point to the exact timestamp when that line of code was executed.

> To illustrate this, a call to ``roctxMark()`` was added after the kernel launch in the timing loop of the `daxpy training example code <https://github.com/amd/HPCTrainingExamples/blob/main/HIP-Optimizations/daxpy/daxpy_5.hip>`_. In the Perfetto trace generated by running ``rocprofv3 --runtime-trace`` and ``rocpd2pftrace``, we see visual markers at the end of each kernel launch in the timing loop ROCTx region.

Reviewer: One more change so that we don't confuse users. Please change `roctxMark()` to `roctxMark("iter")` to show that a string argument is needed in this API call.

Author: done

   "HIP_RUNTIME_API","hipFree",1643920,1643920,15,320301643320908,320301643511479
   "HIP_RUNTIME_API","hipFree",1643920,1643920,16,320301643512629,320301643585639

Profiler control with selected regions
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

The ``roctxProfilerPause()`` and ``roctxProfilerResume()`` APIs can be used in two different ways depending on whether the ``--selected-regions`` option is used with ``rocprofv3``.

Two modes of operation
=======================

**Mode 1: Default behavior (without --selected-regions)**

When running ``rocprofv3`` without the ``--selected-regions`` option, profiling starts **enabled** from the beginning of the application. The ``roctxProfilerPause()`` and ``roctxProfilerResume()`` APIs are used to temporarily hide specific sections of code from profiling.

- Use case: "Profile everything except these specific regions"
- Profiler starts: **Enabled**
- ``roctxProfilerPause()``: Temporarily stops data collection
- ``roctxProfilerResume()``: Resumes data collection
- Example shown in the previous section demonstrates this mode

> **Mode 2: Selected regions profiling (with --selected-regions)**

Reviewer: I can accomplish Mode 2 with the default behavior if I add a `roctxProfilerPause()` call at the very beginning of execution. Is this not possible for some reason?

Author: This is more of a design based question that maybe later Jonathan can help answer.

                       dim3(WIDTH / THREADS_PER_BLOCK_X, WIDTH / THREADS_PER_BLOCK_Y),
                       dim3(THREADS_PER_BLOCK_X, THREADS_PER_BLOCK_Y),
                       0, 0,
                       gpuTransposeMatrix, gpuMatrix, WIDTH);

    // Stop profiling
    roctxProfilerPause(0);

    // Code here is not profiled
    someOtherFunction();

    // Start profiling for region 2
    roctxProfilerResume(0);

    // Region 2: Result retrieval (will be profiled)
    hipMemcpy(TransposeMatrix, gpuTransposeMatrix, NUM * sizeof(float), hipMemcpyDeviceToHost);

    // Stop profiling
    roctxProfilerPause(0);

    // Cleanup (not profiled)
    hipFree(gpuMatrix);
    hipFree(gpuTransposeMatrix);

Run with selected regions enabled:

.. code-block:: shell

    rocprofv3 --selected-regions --marker-trace --hip-trace --kernel-trace --output-format csv -- <application_path>

This command will collect HIP API traces and kernel traces **only** within the regions enclosed by ``roctxProfilerResume(0)`` and ``roctxProfilerPause(0)``. The initialization code, ``someOtherFunction()``, and cleanup code will not be profiled.

**Multiple region profiling:**

> You can instrument your code with multiple ``roctxProfilerResume()``/``roctxProfilerPause()`` pairs throughout the application. The ``--selected-regions`` option will respect all of them, collecting data in each region where profiling is resumed. There is no need to provide a list of regions—all regions enclosed by the API calls will be profiled automatically.

Reviewer: What is the behavior if you have nested pairs?

**Thread-specific control:**

For more fine-grained control, you can use thread-specific pause/resume:

.. code-block:: c++

    roctx_thread_id_t tid;
    roctxGetThreadId(&tid);

    roctxProfilerResume(tid);  // Resume profiling on current thread only
    // ... code to profile ...
    roctxProfilerPause(tid);   // Pause profiling on current thread only

When using ``0`` as the thread ID argument, the control applies to all threads. When using a specific thread ID (obtained via ``roctxGetThreadId()``), the control applies only to that thread.

**Combining with other profiling options:**

> The ``--selected-regions`` option in combination with ``--marker-trace`` works with all tracing and profiling options:

Reviewer: If `--selected-regions` is expected to collect all profiled data and not just marker traces,  why is it necessary to have `--marker-trace` as a mandatory option if `--selected-regions` is used?

Author: You are right, apparently its not. Waiting for a PR(https://github.com/ROCm/rocm-systems/pull/1496/) to get merged so that we don't have to pair these options.

    // Start profiling for region 2
    roctxProfilerResume(0);

    // Region 2: Result retrieval (will be profiled)
    hipMemcpy(TransposeMatrix, gpuTransposeMatrix, NUM * sizeof(float), hipMemcpyDeviceToHost);

    // Stop profiling
    roctxProfilerPause(0);

    // Cleanup (not profiled)
    hipFree(gpuMatrix);
    hipFree(gpuTransposeMatrix);

Run with selected regions enabled:

.. code-block:: shell

    rocprofv3 --selected-regions --hip-trace --kernel-trace --output-format csv -- <application_path>

This command will collect HIP API traces and kernel traces **only** within the regions enclosed by ``roctxProfilerResume(0)`` and ``roctxProfilerPause(0)``. The initialization code, ``someOtherFunction()``, and cleanup code will not be profiled.

**Multiple region profiling:**

You can instrument your code with multiple ``roctxProfilerResume()``/``roctxProfilerPause()`` pairs throughout the application. The ``--selected-regions`` option will respect all of them, collecting data in each region where profiling is resumed. There is no need to provide a list of regions—all regions enclosed by the API calls will be profiled automatically.

**Nested pause/resume pairs:**

> By default, each ``roctxProfilerResume()`` and ``roctxProfilerPause()`` call directly toggles profiling on or off. If you have nested pairs (e.g., a function with profiling control called from within another profiled region), the innermost call will affect the profiling state. To handle nested pairs with reference counting, use the ``--selected-regions-ref-count`` option, which will ignore nested pause/resume pairs and only toggle profiling when the outermost pair is called.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, each ``roctxProfilerResume()`` and ``roctxProfilerPause()`` call directly toggles profiling on or off. If you have nested pairs (e.g., a function with profiling control called from within another profiled region), the innermost call will affect the profiling state. To handle nested pairs with reference counting, use the ``--selected-regions-ref-count`` option, which uses reference counting for pause/resume calls and only toggles profiling when the outermost pair boundaries are crossed..
```

**Thread-specific control:**

For more fine-grained control, you can use thread-specific pause/resume:

.. code-block:: c++

    roctx_thread_id_t tid;
    roctxGetThreadId(&tid);

    roctxProfilerResume(tid);  // Resume profiling on current thread only
    // ... code to profile ...
    roctxProfilerPause(tid);   // Pause profiling on current thread only

When using ``0`` as the thread ID argument, the control applies to all threads. When using a specific thread ID (obtained via ``roctxGetThreadId()``), the control applies only to that thread.

**Combining with other profiling options:**

The ``--selected-regions`` option works with all tracing and profiling options:

- API tracing: ``--hip-trace``, ``--hsa-trace``, ``--marker-trace``, ``--rccl-trace``, etc.
- Kernel tracing: ``--kernel-trace``
- Memory tracing: ``--memory-copy-trace``, ``--memory-allocation-trace``, ``--scratch-memory-trace``
- Counter collection: ``--pmc``
- Thread tracing: ``--advanced-thread-trace``
- PC sampling: ``--pc-sampling-beta-enabled``

.. note::

>    The ``--selected-regions`` option cannot be used together with ``--collection-period``. These are mutually exclusive profiling control mechanisms. Use ``--selected-regions`` for code-based control and ``--collection-period`` for time-based control.

Reviewer 3: will there be a warning or error message to prevent? or it will be rejected for this combination?

Author: @subbul-amd Yes there would be warning :
"rocprofv3 collection period(s) enabled, ignoring roctxProfilerPause/Resume"
